---
layout: post 
category: Book Review 
title: A Little History of the World by E.H. Gombrich 
image: "a-little-history-of-the-world.jpg" 
bordercolor: "#090805"
permalink: /a-little-history-of-the-world/

---

### Introduction

In recent months, I began to realize that my understanding of history was very
muddled. I couldn't tell you the dates, order, or any significant contributions
of ancient civilizations. Nor could I recount important periods, people, general
developments, etc. While I could point many fingers to many people, including
myself (I acknowledge I played a large part in my ignorance), I find this first
and foremost to be a failure of American education. Middle school and high
school rarely ever focused on developing the foundation for history necessary to
properly analyze contemporary historical events. Teachers focused on building
analytical skills for passages and piecing together certain points of view - all
important skills for a historian, but less meaningful without proper context. I
have plenty of additional thoughts on the subject of education, but I will have
to save them for another time. Needless to say, I was unsatisfied with my
understanding of human history, and sought a book to relearn many of those
essential concepts. I am delighted to announce that *A Little History of the
World* was the perfect companion to get me back on track.<br><br>


### A Children's Book, Not A Book for Children

Growing up, I was never especially enthralled by history classes. Most of them
focused on precise, direct causes and effects that led to revolutions and
changes in lifestyle. During the Renaissance for instance, it is easy to
describe the impact that ancient Greece had on the architecture, art, and law in
Italy. But (I would argue) it is *more* important to understand that the
Renaissance occurred contrary to the lifestyle of the Middle Ages, following a
long period of Feudalism. Somewhat ironically, Italy's recapture of antiquity
marked the beginning of the New Age. Understanding the background, the *what
came before* is something that *A Little History of the World* introduces and
expands on wonderfully.


When assigned to write this novel, as mentioned in the introduction, Gombrich
was well aware of his audience and his constraints. He started the book by
making a solemn promise (only broken a handful of times and for very explicit
reasons) to provide a who, what, and when within his descriptions of historical
events. As an addition, Gombrich approached *A Little History of the World* with
little formality, and introduced complexity through *ideas*, generally by
examining the effects that dozens of previous chapters in history had on the
chapter he was narrating. It was written as a children's book by design -
however *A Little History of the World* is still valuable to readers of all ages
looking to standardize history, and put it into context. If you were to read its
reviews on the back of the cover, you would find a general consensus in this:
book critics love this book, and for good reason. As of right now, it is without
a doubt my favorite book.<br><br>


### Reading History

As I mentioned earlier, I was not dedicated to reinforce my understanding of
historical events prior to reading *A Little History of the World*. Fortunately,
and rather excitingly, Gombrich's exploration in human historical events,
recounting epic tales from the dawn of civilization to brilliant and ruthless
emperors and leaders, to conquests on behalf of faith and knowledge, has kindled
a curiosity within me. This book serves mostly as an atlas, a guide through the
ages of civilization if you will. I fully intend to explore some of my favorite
sections in more detail, including ancient Greek and Chinese civilization, the
conquests of Alexander the Great, Confucian philosophy, the Renaissance, and
most surprisingly of all, Napoleon's reign in post—revolutionary France! If you, the
reader, are in desperate need to rekindle your passion for history, or are
perhaps looking to strengthen and contextualize human civilization from
antiquity to WWII, *A Little History of the World* is the perfect book to start
with.<br><br>


*\- Emil Lars Kovačev*<br><br>


### Corrections

#### 2022-01-23  
- Revised wording of renaissance influences
- Corrected title of ancient Greece
